---
title: Introduction
---

# Introduction

As Europe emerges from lockdown and the successful vaccination campaign
fills us with optimism for the future, the Ecole Supérieure d'Art et
Design Saint-Etienne (ESADSE), in collaboration with the Estonian
Academy of Art (EKA) and the Hochschule für Gestaltung Schwäbisch-Gmünd
(HfG), its international partners, takes this opportunity to reflect on
the past year and a half and contemplate the reinvention of art and
design education in a post-Covid era. To address these crucial
questions, the Digital Tools for Creative Collaboration project was
initiated, co-funded by the Erasmus Program of the European Commission,
with the Bureau of Design Associations (BEDA) as an associated partner.

Higher education institutions have demonstrated remarkable adaptability
in response to the challenges posed by the pandemic crisis. We have
successfully transitioned to remote teaching and administrative
procedures. At ESADSE, courses, reports, and competitions have migrated
to the digital realm. The 2019-2020 activity report highlighted our
exemplary commitment. However, this transition came at a cost. It was
executed swiftly, driven by the urgency of the situation, utilizing
readily available digital tools. We trained ourselves on the go, often
outside of working hours, without conducting a thorough reflection on
the origins of these software, web apps, and applications.

In September 2021, as we returned to a semblance of "normal," we began
reflecting on our experience, only to realize that it was far from over.
Our first observation was that we couldn't yet fully grasp the impact
of what had transpired. However, we collectively sensed that teaching
had undergone a profound transformation, and we couldn't simply revert
to the way things were before the crisis. The challenges we faced and
the questions that arose had left an indelible mark. Our second
observation was that while the tools we used allowed us to continue the
semester and stay connected, they were not well-suited for artistic
education and the unique types of interactions it requires.

During this time, we received an extraordinary call for projects from
the Erasmus+ program, specifically targeting the challenges brought
about by the health crisis and the periods of lockdown. The call was
structured around two main thematic strands: "Preparing for digital
education," aimed at strengthening education and training systems to
effectively navigate the sudden shift to online and distance learning
prompted by the Covid-19 crisis, and "Partnerships for Creativity,"
designed to provide support to the cultural and creative sectors, which
have been particularly impacted by the health crisis.

In response to the call, Random() and the International Relations team
of ESADSE in Saint-Etienne, France, collaborated to develop a European
project focused on exploring digital tools for collaboration in art and
design. Implementing a European project requires the involvement of
multiple partners from different countries, with a minimum of three
partners being a condition for participation in the program. DTCC has
provided us with a valuable opportunity to collaborate with our
international partners from EKA and HfG, who share our concerns and
inquiries regarding art and design education.
